EPISODE LINK
https://open.spotify.com/episode/518CzHGgzaVj871wzozlDn?si=LAjH-OSwTNyIFoksHwcCnw

DESCRIPTION
In a world where the internet enables us to learn almost anything….what should we be learning? 
With VR, iPads and eye tracking technology, how is best for us to learn, and, without going into existential territory, why learn at all?

Two teachers join the podcast, one at the end of their career and another at the beginning, 
but both from the same family. Denis and Lewis Pratt join to discuss education.

SHOW NOTES
Global evaluation of education systems (PISA by OECD)
https://www.oecd.org/pisa/PISA%202018%20Insights%20and%20Interpretations%20FINAL%20PDF.pdf

10 reasons why Finland’s education system is the best
https://bigthink.com/mike-colagrossi/no-standardized-tests-no-private-schools-no-stress-10-reasons-why-finlands-education-system-in-the-best-in-the-world

TRANSCRIPT
Introduction
Jacob Pratt 0:10
Hi, welcome to Future Shift. We understand the world better by discussing changing and emerging industries. I’m Jacob Pratt, and today we’re talking about education.
Education is broad. Learning is fundamental from birth, helping babies everywhere to realise that almost nothing should go up on those. And teaching adult men that low low v necks are not right for any occasion. And in a world where the internet enables us to learn almost anything, what should we be learning? With VR, iPads, eye tracking technology, how is best for us to learn Going into existential territory, why learn at all?
This is a big area and everyone will have their own very personal answers to these questions. Technology is helping us learn faster in some areas than ever before. But I wanted to start as broad as I possibly could. Our brains learn best in childhood. So I wanted to explore the views of two people who worked in this area. Two teachers, one having recently retired, and one just beginning that teaching journey.
So I picked up the phone to my dad and my brother.
Denis Pratt
Denis 1:49
I grew up in New Zealand Born in 1950 and stayed in New Zealand until I was 30 years old. I left New Zealand in 1981 to travel with my brother through And arrived in the UK in 1981. Originally for one year, but I’m still here 40, almost 40 years later.
I’m not sure what went wrong.
Jacob Pratt 2:16
That’s Denis Pratt, primary school teacher and my dad with a wealth of experience in the field having taught on the opposite sides of the globe. I asked him some questions about his experiences in New Zealand before coming to the UK.
So So, so what were you doing for those kind of 10 years after you started teaching college still in New Zealand?
Denis 2:43
Well, when I was in New Zealand, I trained in teaching from 72 to 74. And you were We were one of the last intakes where we were paid a salary to be a student. So I was actually paid a wage for three years. But what it meant was that you had to then work for three years. So you know you and you were expected to go to places that lots of other people didn’t want to go to. So my first year I went to a place called Hokatika on the west coast of the South Island and I taught there for a year which was an absolutely amazing place I thoroughly enjoyed it was like the wild wild west in some ways. It was very strict opening hours and closing hours and the rest in New Zealand but on the west coast, they did what they wanted to do.
Jacob Pratt 3:45
What’s the how, how big was Hokitika? Because I mean, I’m I’m remember it haven’t been there a few times. It’s quite small.
Denis 3:51
I suppose it was about 5000 people right on the coast,
Jacob Pratt 3:56
or how many people you’re teaching.
Denis 3:58
Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. That was about 30. It was quite a large class and I had a prefab which was outside of the main main building. And I can remember I can remember actually we, we wanted to paint the classroom because it was really drab inside we wanted to paint a bright colour so I can remember one weekend, parents catalogue children catalogue and we actually painted the classroom was good fun.
Jacob Pratt 4:27
Denis first taught in a small town on the west coast of New Zealand with a community that you’re unlikely to find it present day UK. But I knew he had done a bit more than that before travelling across the world and wanted to know how it had affected his teaching. Well, how long were you in the teaching business overall?
Denis 4:46
Well, I had some breaks. I had a few breaks when when I travel around so I suppose I’ve taught for about 30 years. Hmm, wow. Okay. For about 30 years on and off. I was a house husband for a while. Well, I would call at home looking after the children and it’s been a bit of time in Australia doing different jobs. So I think that was important as well. Hmm. having different life experiences.
Jacob Pratt 5:11
Hmm. What what kind of other experiences Did you have and how did they like help enrich your teaching?
Denis 5:18
Well, I when I was younger, I had a bit of time, possum hunting, possum hunting. Yeah, well, possums in New Zealand are vermin. The possums kind of eat everything in the trees. So they they denude the trees and deer eat everything on the ground. So that it’s it’s it really is affecting the the land the environment in New Zealand So I did that for a while and then I worked on the when I was in Australia worked on the roads Hmm, which was quite quite good fun digging drains and pouring concrete and stuff like that which is quite interesting. also taught in Australia. I taught in Darwin for about six months, which was fun. Yeah. And a real experience
Jacob Pratt 6:09
Why was that?
Denis 6:12
um, well, my brother and I were up in Darwin. We drove from Adelaide through kuva pd out through Alice Springs the dial which took about a week, which was all that was great fun on Alice Springs and those days was a really interesting place and daughters developed as it is now. And we just had a great, great time with three Cooper PD, remember that? And
Jacob Pratt 6:39
you can tell from the smile in your face, maybe there’s some things you don’t want to. You don’t want to fully show
Denis 6:43
Yeah, but there are some things you wouldn’t quite say. You wouldn’t want them to broadcast. I bet it was a very interesting time actually. Um, we also did some cleaning up there as a part time job as well. We were cleaning the police station up there and pulled out a drawer was And there was a revolver with all the bullets and so on.
Jacob Pratt 7:03
Oh, that was news to me.
Denis 7:13
Yeah, and those days and die when you could. This is the late 70s you could go into the pit of station, fill up your car and have a beer at the same time. There’s a little like a bar there where you can put your care in on and thank God goodness that that’s all all changed now,
Yeah. Yeah, so I’ve done a few different jobs besides teaching about teaching has been my main vocation by my main job.
Jacob Pratt 7:43
So Denis had had a few interesting experiences before starting teaching proper first in New Zealand and then Australia. I was eager to understand how these experiences had influenced why he thought education was important and what education was at all. So I asked him about this time and hokey ticker.
Denis 8:11
But But I had a wonderful idea because it I met different people, different ways of thinking, which I think is that what education is about, huh? People their head. Yeah, okay. The government is saying that, but we actually think that perhaps we’ll do it this way. And they don’t, they didn’t always agree with with authorities and, or with the authority. And so it was a different lifestyle over there.
Jacob Pratt 8:38
Hmm. A little bit, the Wild West. So when you’re saying kind of what you see education as as, you know, kind of understanding other people’s ways of thinking, what else? Like what else do you kind of think of as education.
Denis 8:52
When I went to college in 72 74, we were encouraged to develop a philosophy a philosophy of education which I didn’t think that students do this do these days. For example, to me, education was all about developing, of course, you know, your ability and reading, writing and maths. But it was also developing the whole person developing a person skills, their talents, their belief in themselves, developing their confidence, giving children space and experiences to grow themselves not just to take on facts educationally is not just about facts. It’s also very importantly, about helping children develop, to become adults, to give them the opportunities to find out who they are, and what is their role in an ever changing society. And of course, it’s continued to change at a faster pace as we will as I grow older anyway. So how can we help children and adults to prosper adapt and and, and do very well in our ever evolving and changing society.
Jacob Pratt 10:07
Hmm. So it sounds like you feel like it’s more about nurturing each person to become the kind of best version of themselves that they can be.
Denis 10:16
And also believing in certain values like tolerance and understanding. Democracy, of course, I think that’s very important to be able to listen to other people being listened to as well and having empathy for the people around you, your environment, everything in general, actually.
Jacob Pratt 10:41
Already, I was brought into thinking about education in a different way. We weren’t talking about maths and sciences, but about empathy and understanding other cultures. We’re talking about people
I talked to Lewis Pratt, my brother to get another view on the matter.
Lewis Pratt
Yeah, I understand the sound.
Lewis 11:10
So I move on just on the bed. Yeah.
Jacob Pratt 11:14
He was pretty relaxed. A PE teacher in secondary schools. Louis is near at the beginning of his career. And I asked him about why he got involved in teaching and what he thinks education is about.
Lewis 11:37
So PE. That’s my that’s the passion. So that’s the thing that are Yeah, that might my drive is I think it’s incredibly important just for sort of no secret that obesity is becoming an issue, particularly in children. So I think the big thing in schools is how we educate the kids, specifically P which are gonna you know, educate On the importance of lifelong involvement in sport, healthy lifestyles, the importance of actually yeah, being active and staying healthy because as you get through life as I’m sure people like that will tell you, yeah, you helps the most important thing. And I think it I think at school if you don’t set habits and educate the kids on how important it is and how to maintain a healthy lifestyle, what’s important, then, yeah, then yeah, I suppose yet we’ve got no hope. Again, it’s not going to get anywhere. So from a p perspective thing. I think that is the use of schools. What we do and then I suppose the The second thing is, there was sort of a safe place for a lot of kids, and a lot of their sort of life. Life Skills in life learning, probably learnt at school. I think we were quite souls were quite lucky all the people but you know, the upbringing that we had. You’ve got one models all around you So put you on the right path. So he was what’s right and wrong, educate you that way, if you lost a lot of kids, I think it’s probably becoming more prevalent. Now in deprived areas. A lot of kids don’t get that at home. They don’t have the role models, they don’t have sort of a safe environment or like to learn. So I think that’s a bit schools are playing a big part in that nowadays. It’s not, you know, obviously, that the sort of the standard education is important. You know, get your maps, get your science, get your English, etc. But I think schools now Probably, yeah, I’ll be doubling up as, yes, that’s that safe space and allowing kids to grow and flourish and things.
Jacob Pratt 13:46
Again, the focus wasn’t on specific curriculums, theorems or formulas, but on developing a more healthy well rounded person. People First quadratic equations second
So if the early years of learning was about understanding and working with people, what did teachers need to know to support children?
Supporting children as a teacher
Denis 14:15
Well, the thing is, as a teacher, you got to realise we don’t live in a mono culture. You know, I came from Dayton, which was in the 50s, very much a mono culture, in the sense of it was a Scottish city. There were probably other cultures there, but they went to the fore as they are now. And I always knew that because I read, when I was younger, I used to read Time magazine and Newsweek and I was very interested in the news. I knew what was going on around me. I knew about American politics and British politics, European politics, and of course, we were living through the Cold War. So living in very interesting interesting time. And I’ve never lost my fascination with what’s going on in the world. Hmm. And I think as a teacher, it’s very important to realise that the children you are teaching come from very different backgrounds come from very different experiences. There are homes where the child is loved, and cared for and so on. But there are other homes where the child comes into school, and that child is hungry. And perhaps that child hasn’t had a bath or a shower or just just realising that all children come from different experiences from different backgrounds. And I think as teachers, educators, we all need to be very aware of this and very under understanding and open but we need to be very accepting.
Jacob Pratt 15:58
So Watch some of the ways that you can foster this curiosity and help children learn about other cultures. Denis suggested trips, which despite being a logistical nightmare of having the kids roaming around the city was well worth it.
Denis 16:20
But it but it worked and we’re able to get the children out to get out into the community into the wider community. And I think have you experiences I think it’s very important to get out and not just be in school all the time. And you can do it if you you can do it if you can just be a wee bit more innovative, and willing. Hmm. So I think Yeah, education is not just about the three hours. It’s also about developing the child building up the confidence, Chad challenging children to do better working in As a team in the school for children, all that is very, you know, they talk about a well rounded child, child child. I think that’s very important. But you need well rounded educators as well. Mm hmm. I think that’s equally important to deliver
Jacob Pratt 17:18
that. Okay. And so what, what, first of all what what were the three R’s? What when you said that?
Denis 17:24
Well, we are we say reading, writing and arithmetic. Okay. Yeah, yeah, of course educators so much more now. I mean, this is one of the challenges, isn’t it? Because you’re educating children now. For two or three jobs for jobs during their lifetime. Your education never stops.
If you want to if you want to do well in life and you want to do well in life, that’s not just submit. Clearly but also become a well rounded, happy, contented person. We all need to be able to adapt and change and oppose that. Especially now with with COVID-19. Especially, so we need to be able to adapt to new circumstances.
Jacob Pratt 18:23
Education never stops. So, if we are always learning, maybe it’s more important to build the foundations of a well rounded, adaptable human being of a building someone’s skilled in the three R’s that aren’t really ours.
I asked Lewis on his thoughts on how education had adapted since the Coronavirus lockdown and to crystallise his thoughts on what education was about.
Education after Coronavirus
Lewis 18:48
I’m hoping I’m hoping that since lockdowns happens if you you know, you might, you might have noticed, but there’s been a massive push huh? All for all of those sorts of things that aren’t good. Additionally, everyone sort of scores that traditionally. And they always, you know, they’ll always be judged, rightly or wrongly on, can they get kids through to get five C’s in English, math, science, things like that. But you know, it’s since the sort of the lockdown there’s a bit more of a push in terms of what they’re trying to get kids to do. So they’ve obviously there’s a lot of encouragement in terms of cooking are being creative, you know, not making all the NHS silence windows, things like that. And there’s a massive push on the Joe expe thing wasters to get and so hopefully there might be there might be a bit of a change because they’re always the subjects that think have traditionally been underfunded under appreciate. Yeah. And underfunded. Yeah, underfunded doesn’t pay or is it’s about a school in general is just about the whole Oh, yeah, the whole thing. I don’t think it’s a lot of schools opinion. I’ve only been teaching for three years, but what I’ve seen a lot of you get A lot of schools that are just like exam factories. And they just get the kids in. I teach him how to pass the exams. Yeah, kids leave really good grades. And it looks good for everyone. So yeah, that’s all. You know, that’s that’s my view of what some of the schools are, is all about the whole kitchen. Yeah.
Jacob Pratt 20:29
So clearly, education was about more than I had initially thought, and was changing faster than I had anticipated. I wanted to understand how it had changed in the last 40 years to understand whether this really was a new shift and where the future shift lay.
So what did you find as the challenges as you kind of moved through your teaching career, what different colleges kind of came up with Towards the end of your career that weren’t there at the start?
Challenges of teaching
Denis 21:03
Well, one of the things was the the government bringing in the national curriculum. Yes, yes. Some parts were very, very important. It’s very important that children can learn to read, very important that children learn to ride. Very important that children understand and are able to handle numeracy, literacy. All that is very important about that, in my opinion, they narrowed their curriculum down in some parts far too much. And you never had time for art, or enough time for art. You never had enough time for drama. You never had he had enough time for free play. You never had enough time for school trips. So it was just the over emphasis on the basics what they would call the base Which are very, without a doubt are very, very important.
Jacob Pratt 22:06
But it sounds like they lost, like the emphasis on Discovery on learning from new experiences and different experiences.
Denis 22:13
Yeah, I think so. I think I think I think they did. I definitely think they did. And I think they, they need to now look at like Finland where children don’t go to school to their is it seven or eight. They went when they do go to school, they’re not taught to read in the first or second year they’re allowed to play. Hmm. And a lot of it we put far too much pressure on children at a far too early age. You know, you’re teaching children. If you have a home like it with you and your brother, we were surrounded by books I read your stories, your memory, just stories you both learned to read naturally performed before you went to school, but many children don’t have that opportunity books and not The bread and butter in the house, that they are safe in our house, many houses, you know children’s books are just part of everyday life. And stories are part of your life. You read a story and you go to bed and so on. But many children don’t have that. There’s not that kind of culture in their in the family, so they miss out. So anything school is a good chance to foster that. That curiosity and kind of wonder for stories and reading and writing, not just the basic maths and whatever. Yeah, well, I think schools are definitely about that. And that’s one of the very important roles of school has. There are many unfortunate there are too many children in in our, in our communities that they’re missing out. Hmm. Because it might be that they come to school, for example, they might be the parent or the parents are unemployed. Hmm Oh, they’re living in an area. That’s That has got poor housing, or they haven’t got enough food to put on their plates. And I think school has to provide these experiences for children to develop social mobility to develop, you know, a more equal opportunities in life. Education is not the same, you know, you’re not going to give every child the same education but too many children have not got access to good quality education. Often that’s not the fault of the schools. It’s the fault of the schools have it there but the children are coming into school and they’re not prepared, they’re hungry. I think that that is one of the challenges today that not every child has access to, to the quality of it, quality of education, that is that is available to meet too many children.
Jacob Pratt 24:55
So education isn’t the same worldwide with Finland starting school. at age seven, but landing above the UK in the most recent Education Review, of course reading, writing and science, link in the description. These are affected by a huge number of factors. But the education system is likely to be an important one. And locally, the environment around a child outside school is hugely important. I asked Denis a bit more about whether teaching would continue to change and how that would affect different children is what you mean by education.
Future of Education
Denis 25:25
Education is evolving now. And I think it needs to continue to evolve. Is it all going to be classroom based? Is there going to be more independent learning like using zoom and, and and similar platforms? Hmm. But of course, if you come from a disadvantaged background as a child and your parent or parents, your family suffering for whatever reason, you’re not going to be too interested in using zoom and other things. It’s more about survival. So I think the government need really needs to think this through. I know we’re getting political here. But really is it really we need? It’s a bigger picture than just education. Education is linked to social mobility. It’s linked to poverty is linked to housing. It’s linked to what is going on out there. It’s linked. I’m sure it’s linked to culture and race.
Jacob Pratt 26:38
I wanted to ask Lewis, about the same thoughts on whether inequality would be heightened by technology. So I did. Do you see like technology changing it in any way?
Lewis 26:49
Yeah, I think there’s, I think there will be a massive I think it’s already going that way. I think lockdown is sort of accelerated it because everyone is having now to learn How to do stuff virtually graphing computers will pay a huge, a huge role in where we’re going. I think things like so our school we’ve got a virtual reality suite. So says a lot of the kids get to experience sort of a VR VR thing and they’ll get to play around create sort of programmes for it and things like that. It’s even though you know, we don’t use it every day as a lesson. But yeah, the tech is there to do that. And lots of MPs MP not not necessarily law school, but I just know as a sort of general pay bracket is is is loads of stuck around kids now. Using VR codes. QR codes even not be Oh, yeah. Yeah, the things you put in Yeah. So like, you know, we’ll be doing a sport there’ll be like five, so there’ll be five iPads available. If the kids want to need to look at a video to see how to do a certain technique, they can take the thing we can scan the QR code and it comes up with a, you know, like a YouTube video of how to do you know how to do the heart, how to do the high jumper, throw javelins, things like that. So that that’s used, I suppose where it’s accessible. Yeah, people are trying to do it. So do you think there’s a, I think there’s a massive deal, there’s gonna be a big shift in sort of that way. I think the potential problems that is it will make it will make the rich and the poor gap even bigger, because I know for a fact, you know, there’s, there’s certain schools that just have not, there’s no chance that they get a computer for every cable, or a laptop or an iPad for every child, whereas, you know, some of the schools that I’ve worked at, that’s sort of the norm. every kid’s got, you know, every kid’s got their own thing. So, yeah, that’s one of the, I suppose one potential problem.
Jacob Pratt 28:56
So technology is going to change the way we learn and the way we teach Could it get to the point where some children through choice or necessity at all completely without humans? are teachers even needed?
Lewis 29:12
I think teaching is one of the one of the professions where you still need
you still need that, that human contact. Just because I just think it is I think kids, kids need to be taught basically by, by paper. I think a lot of schools and a lot of good schools are based around the pupils and the teachers having a good relationship. And that’s how that’s what gets the that’s what gets the kids to work harder is when they know that the teachers care about them. And and they actually wonder if they want to achieve for the teacher as opposed to more than anything so I think, yeah, I can’t I can’t see teaching being being overtaken Robots been nice. Yeah. Yeah.
Jacob Pratt 30:03
Lewis had hit on a key point about why children learn. It seems to not always be for the love of maths and innate want to be an astronaut or an intrinsic motivation. It can be based on the very human relationship between a student and their teacher helping them to reach the best of their abilities.
And so for anyone wanting to learn something, with or without that extrinsic motivation, I had one last question for Lewis.
I was gonna ask how, how have you found that you’ve learned best from like, how to teach.
Just do it
Lewis 30:53
Oh, just do it. Just
Basically all this. I mean, I was literally this year. I was literally just I was chucked in, and it was just like, right, here you go. We had a department of for, and this is my first full year. So my head of department was off for that’s all months, maybe less, maybe three months. We then had another member of staff who was off for eight weeks. So there was just me and me and this other other women who were just doing the PE for roughly for the whole school. Yes, we’ve got about 1000 kids. So I was literally like, I was actually just checked in. And I was like running the boys, the boys side of the PA and just trying to organise it all. So it was absolutely honestly it was absolutely bonkers. But that’s just, that’s just the Yeah, I just sort of did it. It was like, sink or swim.
Jacob Pratt 32:09
Just do it. Not only a famous slogan, but something we could all learn from. If we want to learn, we don’t always have to find the optimal way to do it. We just have to make a stop. So if any new teachers wanting to join this tough industry, what was the advice someone who had over 30 years of experience?
Okay, and so if you were gonna give one piece of advice to a new teacher starting out, you know, wherever it may be, what would what would you say to them?
Advice for new teachers
Denis 32:58
Um, I would, I would say, look, this is, this is a fantastic job, a fantastic work to be have the privilege to work with, with children, young and older children. They have the privilege to work with caring adults as well.
I would say, Listen to your children, speak to them, talk to them. Listen to adults around job aid, I found that some of the younger teachers coming through had apps that they were just amazing apps I had so much to learn from them. As I think when I started off, I had really fantastic ideas and so on and it we worked in innovative ways. Well, you I became an older teacher. Some of the younger teachers who were coming in were just absolutely amazing. They would have certain problems with certain children which will go the way they dealt with it in a very creative way. was amazing and that is what education is about. It is working in creative, intelligent ways, with children, listening to your children, children listening to you, working with adults around you, you are a team you never on your own.
Enjoy it, I would say enjoy it. But the most important thing you do have is yourself and the people around you it’s it’s all about relating to people having a lot of empathy for children and people around I’m sure
Jacob Pratt 35:01
that no matter kind of what tools you give kind of children actually it’s probably the support. You give them kind of as a, as a human being and helping them through whatever they’re doing, understanding what tools are best, best for them as well. It’s going to help them learn.
Denis 35:15
Oh, absolutely, yes, yes, yes. I mean, one of the biggest things if you can, if you can get a child to believe in themselves, and you can build up their confidence, you can do anything wrong. That’s
Jacob Pratt 35:36
the focus of my conversations on education had been less on the technology, supporting learning in schools, and more on the way that schools help children grow and develop as human beings. Teachers can provide role models where they are absent elsewhere, and help children in more ways than I had even thought about.
Denis 35:57
But I’d also learned about this do all those things that that I’ve been talking about. And also another thing, one thing that we learned, which was a good thing about the national curriculum, we continue to learn, we’re always getting on courses. We are always being challenged. We were always coming up with new ideas. For example, I went on a dance course, you dance course and I used to do this dance, which was held by this guy, he was like a butcher. Right?
Outro
Jacob Pratt 36:27
But that is a story for another time, and next week, we’ll be covering stories from the world of teaching in the future short. The week after that, we’ll be looking outside of schools, how we continue to learn as adults and non traditional ways of learning.
You can follow a future shift on Instagram where additional visual content is provided @future_shift and online at jproduct.co.uk/futureshift. Thanks for listening. Speak to you soon.
Thanks to Denis and Lewis Pratt for this episode. It was inspiring speaking to both of you about this beyond our usual zoom quiz, thanks to Tom bell for the intro jingle used in this and the previous episode that I forgot to credit before. And thanks to Tom and Paddy Tesh for providing feedback on the initial episode, helping to shape this podcast for the better. More feedback is always welcome.
