EPISODE LINK
https://open.spotify.com/episode/5ALLM42jmFfIJWK44uEv26?si=IR977AVhQBypMcSVezztAA

DESCRIPTION
The skills we need for work are changing. So shouldn’t our training change with it? 
That’s what GameAcademy co-founder Irina Agafonova has bet on.

She joined the podcast to discuss whether robots really will take our jobs, which skills employers are looking for, 
the current stigma around gaming and how that is on the cusp of changing, and how gamers can capitalise on their in game talents in the real world.

SHOW NOTES
GameAcademy Website https://www.gameacademy.co/
GameAcademy Discord https://discord.gg/kfFgCYg
UK Shortage Occupation list https://www.gov.uk/guidance/immigration-rules/immigration-rules-appendix-k-shortage-occupation-list
No longer optional: digital skill shortages https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/807830/No_Longer_Optional_Employer_Demand_for_Digital_Skills.pdf
Nesta project information https://www.nesta.org.uk/report/the-future-of-skills-employment-in-2030/

TRANSCRIPT
Jacob Pratt 0:06
Hey, and welcome to future shift where we understand the world better by discussing changing and emerging industries. I’m Jacob Pratt, and today we’re talking about gaming, employability and lifelong education.
Introduction
You’re staring at your screen, in your hastily cobbled together home office. Your shoulders ache from the table being slightly too low, and you forgot the coaster again, so there’s another watermark. You might as well go for gold and complete the fifth ring at this point. These thoughts are distracting you because you don’t want to concentrate on the videos you’re supposed to be watching. People in your team have been saying that systems thinking is what the company is looking for. So an online course followed by a couple of days of classroom teaching with overly eager colleagues should do the trick. 40 hours in total, you can pay attention for five of those and click your way through the rest, but it will still be draining and cost the company a lot of money. you’re frustrated.
Systems Thinking digital leadership and teamwork are important. The nature of work is changing and we need to grow and adapt with it. So should our training adapt with it as well? Couldn’t a SimCity Mayor, World of Warcraft raid leader or an Overwatch top 500 be demonstrating these skills already? That’s what game Academy co founder Irina Agafonova has bet on.
She believes that the skill shortages that developed in an ever changing workplace could be met by the millions of dedicated and skilled gamers out there. We just need some corporate and gaming language translation support She joined the podcast to discuss whether robots really will take our jobs, which skills employers are looking for the current stigma around gaming and how that is on the cusp of changing and how gamers can capitalise on their in game talents in the real world. We started by talking about how Irina co founded game Academy, the London based startup.
Irina Agafonova
Irina 2:22
So my background is in HR education and technology and I was always connected to the three. So I’ve been working for two different universities as a manager and as a lecture. Then I’ve been working as the talent manager in an NGO. And before game Academy, I founded another startup back in Russia, which was an online platform for career advice. And the company now is seven years old. I’m not operationally involved anymore, but it is successful. fully working in the Russian market. So all my passion and love for employability for the education and for kind of upscaling people came into this venture into game Academy.
Jacob Pratt 3:18
So, Irina lived in Moscow up until 2018, where she developed her passion for upskilling and personal development, setting up Brainify in 2013. and delivering leadership training to companies such as Uber. She came over to London in 2018, I’m faced with the struggles of getting a job in a new country, decided to make her own. I asked her how she felt she was co founding game Academy,
Irina 3:43
I felt that I found the gold.
Jacob Pratt 3:47
So she had a great idea. But how was it personally to make something from nothing?
Irina 3:53
I think it is always challenging to start something new. So the whole range of emotions sometimes you You feel excited sometimes you feel lost. Sometimes you feel anxious. So every journey is settled, throwbacks and moving forward. So I felt lots of many things.
Jacob Pratt 4:15
Despite the throwbacks and emotions that come with starting a new venture, Irina had identified something she believed in the matched her personal interests, and perhaps most importantly, solve the problem in industry today.
Skills gap in industry
Irina 4:30
Well, initially, the work we’re doing at game Academy was inspired by the shortages in digital skills. We’ve spoken to UK Government, we’ve spoken to a few big corporates and they were all saying we lack digital skills. We need people who can do digital jobs. We cannot find them right now. So there is just not enough.
Jacob Pratt 4:54
It’s no surprise that digital skills are in demand as we move towards a more technology and nature workforce, but what jobs needed these skills? And where were their shortages in the UK, Irina had looked at the UK shortage occupation list, which identifies the jobs that are in high demand. Now, these are mainly used for visa and immigration purposes, but provide an insight into where skill shortages exist.
Irina 5:19
So currently, there are 35 occupations in this list. I would say the majority are technical and by technical, there are UX designers. There are software engineers, but there are also for example, welders or geologists, so different different occupations, but not just technical. There are also musicians, medical practitioners, speech and language therapists, nurses, architects, social workers, dancers and choreographers.
Jacob Pratt 5:59
I’m really surprised by the emphasis on the arts, because that’s not normally a kind of skill set is recognised.
Irina 6:06
Oh, I wouldn’t necessarily agree I would say on them around the world UK economy is very well recognised for the creative industries. And the UK Government understands it very well. For example, we are a members of UK, which is an association for interactive entertainment. And when we speak to colleagues from there or to colleagues from the government, government is always very proud of the UK creative industries and there are different there is a different support with loans with investment etc. So, creative industries are there and medical occupations are there, but still, I would say two thirds are a technical and different engineering.
Jacob Pratt 6:58
So there are skill shortages across a variety of jobs, from skilled classical ballet dancers to high integrity pipe welders, but technical jobs made up the vast majority, graphic designers, software developers and engineers, all in demand. So I asked the obvious question, why are technical and digital jobs in demand?
Irina 7:19
Well, the first reason is that the nature of work is changing. And some of the jobs will be automated. And even though this forecast that all robots will take our jobs, they’re not necessarily true. There is a very good report by McKinsey where they calculated that only 5% of occupations will be kind of completely automated. However, 50% of workstreams will be automated, it means that majority of jobs will be blended where an employee worker would need to understand how to work with robot how to work with new machinery how to work with computers, but then there will be still some tasks which are not automated. And currently there I just know enough that there is just not enough talent for this kind of blended jobs. So a few months back, I visited the steel factory up north, and what happened was this steel factory that they had them, the floor was 50 workers, where workers were manually kind of assembling stuff working with the equipment etc. A few years back, they automated the whole floor. Instead of this 50 workers. They now have the room up there with the consoles, and it looks a little bit like a gaming room on the esports tournament or something. And there Tim people just move us to Bart’s automatically and they were sharing with us that they’ve been really struggling to select out of these people out of this 50 workers 10 who would fit into this, you kind of skill set into this new job that they need to perform, because it is it requires steel understanding on how the factory works. But it requires also dexterity, attention to detail, ability work, to work with computers, multitasking, etc. And we see it across different industries, so people who can keep their jobs and be relevant, they should have the new set of skills, digital skills, soft skills, ability to understand new technologists ability to work remotely. And when we were thinking okay, where can we find the population be? Enough to upskill them to this jobs. We thought, Well, what about gamers? There are two and a half billion people out there who have a very similar profile
Jacob Pratt 10:13
Robots won’t rob our jobs, they’ll just push us off the floors and into the console stations. This is just one of the many changes across different industries where soft skills and digital skills will become increasingly important. And Irina thinks that gamers can bring more than just a familiarity with other consoles.
Skills from gaming
Irina 10:33
Well, I think it is even a little bit broader than the skills so we have skills, traits, interests, every gamer is interested in technology. I’ve spoken to hundreds of gamers, I haven’t met any single one who wouldn’t be interested in the latest gadgets, in software in hardware. So they’re very much into this world. Then Games every day, gamers train their soft skills, soft skills, cognitive skills like system thinking, working memory, teamwork, digital leadership, remote communication, multitasking, and this skills is very hard to develop in the classroom. It is expensive, it takes lots of time, you cannot predict the results and games. They’re kind of super engaging, fun environment where people everyday repeat, persevere, try fail, try again. So this is just the perfect playground to train this skills. And yet, this is what people are doing already. That’s why it’s more kind of the question of translating the skills into professional ones. And this is the area of the research that is quite innovative.
Jacob Pratt 11:57
The idea that games can provide an engaging and fun way to learn and that it’s already happening. It’s just an issue of translating gaming skills into corporate language. However, gaming, similar to movies, covers a lot of ground and includes various genres. Surely fans of horror films would have different interests and traits to fans of comedies. So shouldn’t fans a first person shooting games have different skills to puzzle gamers? As a fan of gaming myself, I wanted to know which game genres developed to which skills.
Irina 12:30
If you play RPGs, then you might have a creativity traits. If you play puzzle games, then you have an analytical mindset. And you might want to consider a software engineering career if you play Xcom. If you’re good at resource management, that’s probably the managerial type of job where you need to coordinate various processes will be for you. If you play MMOs. If you look Teams if you have squads, then different kind of Remote Jobs with the communication, or maybe entrepreneurial jobs would work for you. So we are looking into different parameters, key genres, time play key achievements, interests together because sometimes people might play a lot but not necessarily like it. So we have the whole model how we are analysing gaming profiles, and then we are correlating it to skills into jobs. But usually when we speak to a gamer, we can also kind of sport the key traits.
Jacob Pratt 13:41
So the games you play, influence or reflect the skills and traits you’ve developed, which in turn can be used to match you to jobs who would be a good fit for the argument is persuasive, and I use myself as a guinea pig to test it. Having mainly played role playing games for the storytelling and emphasis on character, puzzle games as an intellectual challenge and strategy games for the strategy. My bio of being analytical, creative and suited to managing resources hit my ego in just the right way that it was sold. But there are challenges to making this link between gaming and business. First of all, how society currently views gaming and gamers themselves.
Stigma in gaming
Irina 14:21
There are still lots of prejudice about gaming lots of guilt that gamers feel for their parents for their partners and we are saying that hey, your gamer you’re super talented, you should be proud of it. You shouldn’t be just there feeling guilty and sad because you’re doing something what you love so we are promoting conscious gaming but we are also helping gamers to translate what they do for their loved ones for their peers, etcetera. So there are still lots of challenges there.
Jacob Pratt 14:59
While gaming is becoming increasingly understood and accepted, older the gaming stereotypes seen brutally in 2006 is South Park episode make love not Warcraft still persists today with certain demographics, particularly the older generation. Irina speaks more specifically on a collaborative project with Nesta, the Global Innovation Foundation and the Department of Education that looks to support learner motivation and career adaptability and people without degree level education. The project would based on research changes to skills needs in the UK over the next 10 years with a large increase in skills of identifying connections between systems and evaluating feedback which Irina links to gaming.
Irina 15:42
and this particular project is about people within their national retraining scheme horde so adults based in England without education at the degree level and whose jobs are at risk of automation. This population also plays videogames extensively Call of Duty GTA Fallout Assassin’s Creed all the top genres, at least 15 hours a week. However, there are lots of barriers for these people to progress with work connected to self confidence. They don’t necessarily see the opportunities. They don’t understand what skills they have already, what skills they need, how to choose the right educational opportunities. So we are just helping these people first to profile themselves to figure out what they’re good at, to clarify what is it that they want? What is the best job for them, where they will be happy and fulfilled, and then we are helping to kind of to sketch this path for them and to guide them through it.
Jacob Pratt 16:51
It is impossible to generalise a whole group of people, especially those with the diverse interests and personalities of people who play games, but I Reena had it. Identify gamers as a solution to the future skills gap, seeing the games developed skills that will be relevant in the future, in doing this should come up against another issue. We are bombarded with information media and new and interesting potential jobs every day. There are times when even I long for the days when your family was a smithing family. So your future path was clear. And you could focus on eating plain bread. But we don’t live in that world today. So when things are changing, it can leave people with a crushing amount of options.
Irina 17:31
Because for many people, it is hard to figure out what they want, especially in this time of change when they maybe don’t really like what they’re doing. They may be burned out in the previous job and they’re okay Is that it? I want to do great things. I want to do something interesting in my life, but I feel lost. And then we just need to find some hooks on how you can bring this clarity to yourself and start working towards Your goals so if you are doing some activity, then 20 hours per week then it says a lot about you. Many gamers were speaking with, they might have 10 years of work experience and 20 years on their game experience. So in fact, they spent more time playing games then when doing work. And we can use this as the way to discover yourself to self reflect what you like, what you don’t like, and then help to shape it into the kind of new goal new career trajectory, your educational trajectory etc.
Jacob Pratt 18:41
So gaming not only met a skills need an industry, but also a personal need to help someone discover what they really enjoy and what they would like doing for work. If at the end of an eight hour day you find yourself turning to a puzzle game that might say something about your enjoyment of analysing and solving problems. That’s not all games can do. Irina laid out a couple more benefits on how gaming could be used for upskilling. Using the example of civilization, a turn based strategy game that is all about resource management and decision making.
Benefits of gaming in education
Irina 19:13
Yes, so we are also upskilling people using video games. decision making is one of the courses where we give you in game challenges and real life challenges to train the skill. So let’s say you’re playing civilization. And before you were playing unconsciously, and now we tell you Okay, let’s apply thinking out of the box next time, you need to make your turn in civilization come up with at least five different options of what this third might be can be rational can be crazy options, you know, just think out of the box. And then when you do it for one turn four or five turns for 10 turns something kind of opens up in You’re just training this creative thinking and thinking out of the box. So similar to this example, we’re just giving people in game challenges to train their decisions, goal setting, creativity, etc. And it is easier to train it in the gaming context, which I know I love, I feel very familiar with the environment there. And after it, you can train it in the real life context, when you need to choose the job apply for the job decide for something important in your life. So our teaching methodology is try in a game first, and then do the same thing in real life.
Jacob Pratt 20:45
Again, it makes sense there are parallels to various other teaching methods out there, racing in a simulation before heading out onto the racetrack, and even repetitively completing maths exam after maths exam before never using that quadratic formula again, And I asked Irina to expand on my games was such a powerful tool for learning
Irina 21:05
repetition, because, uh, you only can train the skill when you try many times, especially with the soft skills because we are all reading lots of self help books watching TED Talks. But what have we applied from this knowledge. So it’s not about gaining the new knowledge It is about trial and error in games, just give this loop and then loop, change something in your brain. And through repetition, you gain new habits. So it is good because you have this repetition and you can build a habit. It’s good because it is fun and engaging. And it’s good because people are already doing it. So it’s easy to start.
Jacob Pratt 21:50
Games provide an engaging experience that encourages people to learn through trial and error, all in an environment that they used to and comfortable with. There’s an argument that learning also needs to take place outside of your comfort zone. Listen to previous episodes to hear about people who did exactly that. In the age of information where our attention is being dragged from screen to screen, this focus on repetition of a singular engaging activity to upskill is enticing. But my focus was still on the stigma around gaming is now the right time for gamers to translate their skills to jobs, and our attitudes around gaming and really changing.
Irina 22:29
It is changing, it is changing already. First, we see now that all the big tech companies, they’re having gaming divisions, Amazon, Facebook, they’re all moving into gaming, they are all investing lots of money into it. Brands all recognise gamers as the target audience, right and through through this different different ways. The stigma is changing in the corporate world. if let’s say the CEO General Manager now is in her or his 50s or 60s? Yes, probably gaming is something not very clear for them. However, people who are now in their 30s or 40s, they are the gaming generation. And the average gamer is 34 years old, right? So when this new generation of general managers will come and they’re coming kind of in the next five years, I think there will be a serious change.
Jacob Pratt 23:34
With the average age of gamers increasing as a whole generation of kids raised on the stuff become older people in charge of employment decisions will have a greater understanding and respect for gaming, reducing the stigma around it. The recent release of Google stadia and Amazon moving into games is increasing awareness to we had discussed the skill shortages in the workplace how gamers were ready to fill that gap with a little push, and how games can be used for developing specifics. skills. So how is gaming Academy set to help gamers with this transition? Irina described three activities. First, solving the issue of people’s lack of understanding of themselves.
Game Academy
Irina 24:12
The first way is our diagnostics process of the gaming profiles when we look into your steam or PlayStation and Xbox, and based on it, we give you something like a personality report with skills, traits, Skeen sides, key drivers, potential occupations.
Jacob Pratt 24:32
Second, based on that diagnostic, you can develop skills you want for future roles, using conscious gaming.
Irina 24:40
We have courses featuring soft skills because the main things that you can train in popular commercial video games are the soft skills, so things like decision making, creativity and communication. So the current course that we’ll be doing early September is about decision making and how can you make the right decision about finding the best job for you.
Jacob Pratt 25:06
And finally, supporting and developing that link between gamers and businesses.
Irina 25:12
We have the signposting when based on this new knowledge, what you’ve discovered about yourself, your new kind of confident, brave state of mind, we can show you particular education or employment opportunities that would work for you. And we are now focusing more on the digital and creative in the States. But we hope to do the wide range because some gamers they’re thinking, Okay, what can I do, maybe I need to become a game designer or a pro player. And these are the top options, but there are so many other options and we just want to to show more possibilities to gamers.
Jacob Pratt 25:58
So the aim is to help people understand themselves through gaming upskill using gaming, and then link the newly confident and skilled gamers with a wide range of employment opportunities. And Irina made the link between gaming and business, even more concrete,
Irina 26:14
the concept of work and the concept of play, they’re coming close to one another. They’re all this gamified services these days. And business to some extent is a game where you need to achieve new things unlock you unlock new opportunities, beat your competitors. So there are lots of similarities if you approach it in the right way. So I think that in the future, the game world and their professional world they will be just coming closer to one another.
Jacob Pratt 26:52
clear goals, problems to solve and heavy competition. The comparison between gaming and business is apt the Fast managers I’ve worked with have used this to their advantage, providing lots of feedback and clear boundaries to help people achieve the clear goal set out no invisible wall set up to frustrate colleagues. We haven’t talked specifically about gamification in this episode because it’s been implied throughout. gamification is a tool to motivate and promote specific habits, which is what Irina has spoken about through actual gaming. And it’s based on psychology that I don’t have the degree to talk about in detail, maybe one for a future episode. We also hadn’t talked about the darker side of gaming and addiction. The stories of people who’ve had left that room for days and the stories of deaths. Irina spoke about conscious gaming, and how understanding your reasons for playing games can support your broader life.
Irina 27:50
So people play games, because of the different reasons some people like competition story. Some people play To escape, and it is just important to understand what are you escaping from right and relaxation is a good motivation. But if if gaming for you is a way to escape from real life, then you just kind of lie to yourself. And you would still face the real life in one way or another. And when we say conscious gaming, we’re saying it is a great and 13 month, but not if you’re playing it 50 hours a week, and you don’t have any other activities out there. So there should be balance in everything and conscious gaming. It is about understanding what you’re doing, why you’re doing it, how much time you spend for games, and how much time you spend for other things in other areas in life because we all have different interests, and we can be happy and fulfilled only if we balance different things in our lives.
Jacob Pratt 29:00
In gaming, understanding its impact on you personally and using it as a development tool amongst various other tools in the real world is what arena is advocating. And so I had one final question on the topic of how gamers can make the most of their gaming habits. If you are going to give some advice to a game out there who wants to capitalise on their in game skills in the real world? What advice would you give them?
Capitalise on your in-game skills!
Irina 29:26
Just start from this self discovery.
Ask yourself what you’re good at. Ask yourself, what are your key in game achievements? What are the key skills that you’re learning? And then just think how you can express it in the professional language? Yes. So in the job interview, you don’t necessarily need to explain the whole kind of games and achievements because maybe this language is not necessarily something that an HR manager would understand. However, they understand very well the skills language. This language of skills and traits is this translation that gamer can understand and HR or employer can understand. So don’t be afraid to express yourself, but express yourself in the kind of professional way.
Jacob Pratt 30:20
Irina had laid out how game Academy plan to use gaming to help people understand and value their own skills, develop new skills in a motivating repetitive environment, and transfer these skills into professional language to meet the growing skills gap out in industry. This seemed to be a unique proposition in the marketplace. This was the reason I wanted to speak to her in the first place, and with increasing unemployment related to Coronavirus is likely to hit young people hard this seems well placed to resonate with them and motivate people to get involved in the world of work, training and lifelong development. There were still questions around whether some skills such as leadership Could be developed in such a narrow and repetitive environment, but we had run out of time. So if you want to understand game Academy more or get in touch, how can you do that?
Irina 31:09
They can just check our website gameacademy.co, or they can just find me on the LinkedIn. Irina Agafonova, or they can find the game Academy on LinkedIn this might be easier than spelling my last name.
Jacob Pratt 31:27
Thank you very much.
Irina 31:29
Thank you. Thank you, Jake.
Outro
Jacob Pratt 31:34
Thank you for listening. If you want to see more from Future Shift, including show notes, all the links will be on the website at jproduct.co.uk/futureshift. You can keep up to date with additional visual content on Instagram @future_shift. Or find me any other way you know how. The next episode will be a future short looking at the wild trends in education across the world finding a few outtakes from the education episodes and summarising what we’ve learned from the four immensely interesting people we’ve spoken to on the subjects. Thank you to Irina for joining, to Laura Bengescu for support and the website and branding Tom bell for the intro jingle and thanks to you for listening. Speak to you soon. Bye
