EPISODE LINK
https://open.spotify.com/episode/601C1HVBtXfeikdBT9Lhh7?si=sfY1A5s6SAGKnms8lu7SfA

DESCRIPTION
Artificial Intelligence is everywhere, 
and in this Future Short we learn more about AI through the great content already out there.

SHOW LINKS
AI Applications: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Applications_of_artificial_intelligence
MuseNet: https://openai.com/blog/musenet/
Open Jukebox: https://openai.com/blog/jukebox/
Crash Course, AI: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a0_lo_GDcFw
Juergen Schmidhuber TedX talk: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Y7PLaxXUrs
EU High-Level Expert Group on AI documents: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/policy-and-investment-recommendations-trustworthy-artificial-intelligence

TRANSCRIPT
00:04 Jacob Pratt
Hey, and welcome to Future Shift, where we look at how jobs and industries are changing to learn more about our world.
I’m Jacob Pratt and today we have a Future Short episode, where we will summarise and signpost towards some great content out there in the internet. Today we’re getting started with Artificial Intelligence, or AI, broadly defined as a machine that can interpret data, sometimes learn from it, and use this data to achieve specific goals. One example is your Youtube recommendation algorithm, that takes your previous viewing and searching habits in as data, makes sense of this data, and provides you with videos you will want to watch, with the aim of keeping you watching Youtube videos for as long as possible. And AI’s reach extends much further than just this.
In this episode we look at some quick content to pique your curiosity on AI, some medium length videos to get a broader view on it, and some longer reports to look at how we can positively control its impact on society. All the links will be in the Show Notes and on jproduct.co.uk/futureshift.
Just think of this series as a competitor to Google, except you don’t control the search and the results take 10mins to get back to you.
01:16 Jacob Pratt
I searched for a long time to find a simple, easy to read list of all the current applications of AI, to show just how broad its impact is. What I kept coming back to was the teacher discredited but highly referenced Wikipedia.
Before you switch off immediately at that notion, Wikipedia is a treasure trove of information, especially when getting into a subject, and in popular topics has a high number of references to show it’s not just internet trolls making the edits.
And the applications of AI page shows just how broad the applications of so called “Narrow AI” are, or AI that is developed to tackle one, very specific problem, without attempting to imitate the mind and conduct logical reasoning. It’s used in agriculture to predict when tomatoes will ripen, in Education to personalise learning and provide instant feedback, in Finance to make millions of trading decisions a day, in Government to assist in policy decision making, in Medicine to diagnose patients more accurately, in Gaming to replace human players when needed, even in Wikipedia itself to detect vandalism. If you want to discover some applications you hadn’t thought of, on an interface that you will no doubt be comfortable with, look at the Wikipedia link in the description.
02:25 Jacob Pratt
Also on the list is AI in music. You may have seen the AI generated Rembrandt painting and the deepfake Starry Night image, and there’s a chance you will have heard some form of artificially produced music. But OpenAI gives you a chance to make some of your own.
OpenAI, co-founded by Elon Musk and invested in by Microsoft, is known for developing OpenAI Five, the AI that won 99.4% of matches against humans in the online game Dota 2, as well as MuseNet.
MuseNet allows you to create music in various styles, with various instruments, using a popular musical phrase at the beginning to kick it off, for example the Harry Potter theme in the genre of Jazz. You can play around with this to see the potential for AI to produce simple, commercial music very quickly, and to see the current restrictions in doing so. My attempt to make Video Game music with Harry Potter as the seed quickly became boring and stale, so there’s still space for composers out there.
There is also a more recent music generation attempt by OpenAI called Open Jukebox, though this requires more effort to explore than MuseNet, so if you want you have a mess around with it, link is in the description, as will be true for all topics covered.
And now we move onto the longer form videos to improve your understanding of AI.
03:44 Jacob Pratt
If you want to learn more about AI, but find the whole field overwhelming, or the many genuinely interesting podcasts on it a bit too pretentious (Come on Intelligence Squared, Exponential View, umm Future Shift), then Crash Course is a fantastic alternative.
Started about 9 years ago by Vlog Brothers John and Hank Green, Crash Course provides fun, engaging and free ways to learn about a whole variety of subjects. Episdoes are often written by university lecturers and presented by friendly faces, backed up by animation and set dressing to provide just the right amount of cheese.
The series on AI doubles down on this, with Star Trek esque lights in the back and a super cheesy mascot robot, but nails the pacing to help you learn about what AI is without really realising it. The introductory video is linked, and the whole 4 hour series is on Youtube for free, great content for anyone interested in the area. If the aim of informative content is to be entertaining and educational, then this nails it.
But if you want something more apocalyptic, then the next suggestion is for you.
04:44 Jacob Pratt
The term “Father of Modern AI” gets thrown around a lot, showing just how male dominated the field has been and how much we love family comparisons with tech, and one of the Mamma Mia-esque contenders for that title is Jurgen Schmidhuber.
An important figure in the research and development of AI since the late 80s, the TedX talk linked to in the description is a fascinating and engaging insight into why Jurgen thinks AI will change everything. Starting with his yearning to make an impact in his youth, and ending with how he thinks we will lead the cosmos to a new type of lifeform that will dethrone us as the crown of creation, the talk is a full of interesting tidbits, including information on AI in healthcare and the scarily rapid evolution of technology. It’s also a demonstration of how to present with confidence. In a totally black suit, calm and considered in his manner, he is charismatic and owns the stage and audience attention, despite the sometimes technical nature of the subject matter.
Whether you agree with him or not on whether self replicating robot factories will expand across the universe, this is a great take from an experienced researcher on the long term effects of AI. And if you’re wondering about what we can, and should, be doing now with AI, the last long read is for you.
06:02 Jacob Pratt
You would be forgiven for thinking that the biggest supergroup in Europe was McBusted with their 2014 debut McBusted, but they have been usurped by a different kind of supergroup. The EU commission sets up expert groups to act as consultative bodies to provide advice and expertise on certain matters, and one of these is the High Level expert Group on artificial Intelligence.
Made up of 52 experts across academia, civil society and industry, the group’s aim is to support implementation of the EU strategy on AI. In reality, this means turning a vague direction for AI into recommendations for what specific sectors need to do now. It’s all good that in hundreds of years AI may have succeeded us, but what can we do now to develop AI in a controlled manner to ensure that it meets the needs of humans. They have produced two key documents, which may not grab your attention but should.
The first looks at ethics in AI, an area that is growing in importance as we develop further Artificial General Intelligence and move to wider AI use. This lays out the crucial need to use a human-centric approach to AI. This means not just following our interests in using AI to make better, more addictive recommendation algorithms on Youtube, but ensuring it is used purposefully to meet specific goals humans have set out to benefit us.
It also lays out the 7 requirements that AI should meet in order to be trustworthy. AI needs to, one, be based on human agency and oversight and not undermine human autonomy, Two, be safe and prevent harm. Three, adhere to privacy and data governance. Four, be transparent. Five, enable inclusion and diversity throughout its lifecycle, six, prevent wider harm in society and the environment, and seven, be auditable and accountable.
Clearly the difficulty is in implementing AI that meets these requirements, but this provides a start to ensure that AI is developed and applied in a way that benefits humans, and doesn’t harm us.
However, the long recommendation here is their second report, a 52 page, dense, policy driven report that makes 33 recommendations on how countries and institutions need to use Trustworthy AI for the benefit of Europe, but could be easily transferred to other regions. By providing these recommendations, it implicitly states the challenges and blockers that we will face in using AI for good, in a purposeful, trustworthy way. If the end result is AI domination, this sets out how can we make sure that we’re in control of when, and if, that AI domination happens, and make the journey there a pleasant one.
There is so much good stuff hidden in here on the challenges and potential solutions, but I’ll pick a few choice bits out.
If one blocker is people’s lack of education on AI, meaning that most people can’t actually use it beneficially, the report has provided recommendations to redesign education systems, use a Digital Competency framework to measure capabilities and provide incentives to encourage AI career paths.
If another blocker is the lack of AI use in the small and medium enterprises that make up 99% of Europe’s businesses and over half of total turnover, recommendations include programs to provide funding and guidance to these smaller businesses.
And if one likely outcome is the design of AI systems that do not cater to users with disabilities and which exacerbate inequality, then design approaches that enforce reviews for various societal groups and encourage “AI for Good” development should be enforced.
This is a long read, but there are good summaries near the start, and if you’re interested in how  research and academia, the private sector and public sector may need to adapt to use AI in a human centric way, this is the one for you. Can’t wait to see if the supergroup stays together for a third smash hit.
09:52 Jacob Pratt
Thanks for listening to this Future Short, reminder that links to the five pieces of content mentioned are in the show notes and on jproduct.co.uk/futureshift. You can also follow Future Shift on Instagram @future_shift, or find me any other way you know how. And I won’t say what the next episode will be this time, because I never get it right anyway.
Thanks for listening, speak to you soon, bye.
